VR Mode - integration of GNU Emacs and Dragon NaturallySpeaking.
	Available at http://emacs-vr-mode.sourceforge.net.

Copyright 1999 Barry Jaspan, <bjaspan@mit.edu>, 2001-2003, 2007 Patrik
Jonsson <patrik-voice at familjenjonsson.org>. All rights reserved.
See the file COPYING.txt for terms of use.

VR Mode integrates the features of Dragon NaturallySpeaking with GNU
Emacs.  You must already have and be familiar with NaturallySpeaking
3.52 and GNU Emacs 19.34 (or newer versions) in order to use VR mode.
However, there are problems with Emacs 21.x.


RELEASE NOTES: Release 011

This is identical to R010 except that it is now possible to run VR
Mode in "no-window mode" by setting both vr-class and vr-window to
nil. In this mode, VR Mode will attach the functionality to the VR
Process window itself and when this is active send dictation to the
connected Emacs. What's the point? This makes it possible to run DNS
and VR Mode under Parallels/Windows in MacOS and dictate into a Mac Emacs!
Since DNS can't see which Mac window is active, this was the simplest
way of doing it.


RELEASE NOTES: Release 010

Fixed some problems that prevented VR Mode from working with Emacs
versions 22 and higher.  Most of the problems have to do with the
development of Emacs going towards using multibyte characters in all
kinds of places.  Hopefully it should now be usable and stable with
newer versions of Emacs.  I think at this point version 21.x is the
worst option, because of the tendency to resynchronize the buffer at
every utterance.  However, it is still functional even in this case.


RELEASE NOTES: Release 009

Apparently, I was wrong about usable with Emacs 21.x.  Unfortunately,
I have no reason to think this version will work better in that
respect.  However, it should have fixed the problem causing an
assertion failure to pop up in certain situations, most often when
vr.exe would timeout waiting for Emacs to complete a command.  It
should also have fixed a problem that would cause a crash if an active
buffer was deleted.  (The only time I had encountered this was if you
activated the VC buffer into which you type check-in comments.)  It
should also properly handle cases when Emacs itself crashes, in such a
way that it properly unregisters itself from NaturallySpeaking.

VR mode now includes the abbreviation commands that used to be in the
old PBV kit file pbvElse.el. Since I've spent some amount of time
getting these to work with VR mode, it seems reasonable to make sure
everyone has access to this functionality if they want, without
finding the other file.  See the README for setup information.


RELEASE NOTES: Release 008 beta

(We're going from one beta release to another here, apparently 007
beta worked pretty well because I didn't hear anything from people.)

VR Mode should now be usable with Emacs 21.x.

The biggest change is that vr.el now will convert multibyte buffers to
unibyte before sending it to vr.exe.  Before, activating a buffer
containing multibyte characters would make VR Mode choke since the
number of characters sent differed from the number of bytes.  This
would manifest itself as vr.exe saying "out of memory trying to
allocate <ridiculously large amount of bytes>" or just hanging on the
get-buffer-info call.  This seemed to happen particularly often under
Emacs 21.x.  Please report any instances of this.

VR Mode will also know correctly handle buffers that shrink in size.
Before, this could cause spurious insertions of trailing spaces in the
minibuffer.

Included the patch from David Fifield that makes it possible to put
the names of lists of commands in vr-voice-command-list.  Thanks!


RELEASE NOTES: Release 007 (My name is Mode, VR Mode...) beta

This release contains a fix for a bug that could cause vr.exe to crash
when remotely connected clients disconnected.  Please report any
crashes that happen when killing Emacs, killing buffers or exiting VR
Mode.

Another change is a different behavior when exiting VR Mode in an
Emacs that was used to spawn vr.exe.  Before, it would unconditionally
terminate vr.exe, now vr.exe will hang around until all remote
instances of Emacs have disconnected.  If you re-enter VR Mode from
the local Emacs, it will attempt to reconnect to vr.exe if it's still
running.  If that fails, it will spawn a new vr.exe just like before.

This version also uses a new communication protocol, which can send
changes both before and after the utterance.  The purpose of this was
to make VR Mode more compatible with Peter Milliken's else-mode, so if
you don't use else-mode you can forget about it, except for the fact
that you will have to update vr.el on all machines you use.
(Currently you can forget about it even if you do, because it's not
functional.  It's not clear to me yet whether it will actually be
useful are not.)


RELEASE NOTES:  Release 006

This release incorporates the changes Patrik made.  They are too many
to enumerate, but highlights include:

- works with NaturallySpeaking version 5, including eliminating the
  c0000005 exception when VR.EXE terminates.

- changes are being sent as keystrokes instead of characters.  This
  means that modes that have nonstandard keyboard mappings, e.g. "=>''
  in latex-mode, works as expected.  The penalty is that you can't
  "Scratch That" in these cases.

- now supports continuous dictation commands through Hans vanDam's
  abbrevs mechanism, without losing buffer sync.

- does not lose sync when using font-lock-mode.

- does not lose sync when trying to dictate into a read-only buffer.

- "fixed" a bug which would cause fill-paragraph to end up in an
  infinite loop.

- added a command "resynchronize" to manually ask for a buffer
  resynchronization if (heaven forbid!  :-) that should be needed.

   
RELEASE NOTES:  Release 005

Release 005 was released under the GNU General Public License in
December 2001.

This release fixes the known bugs in V005 beta 1.
Changes include:

- Works on Windows 2000.

- Reworked voice command setup; anyone who customized their voice
command list should read the help information for
vr-voice-command-list for the new structure.

- New voice command "repeat that <0to20> times" repeats most recent
voice command 0 to 20 times.

- Fixed a synchronization bug caused when a new utterance began
before the previous command finished.

- Minibuffer activation is now properly controlled by
vr-activate-minibuffer.

- Keyboard activity is automatically locked out during speech
recognition.

- Other miscellaneous bug fixes.

RELEASE NOTES:  Release 005 Beta 1

Version 005 is a fairly major upgrade to VR Mode, with numerous new
features.  Unfortunately, it may also be somewhat unstable; I suspect
there is a memory bug lurking somewhere.  Thus, this is a beta
release.  Please report problems or successes.  Changes include:

- Added support in VR.EXE for multiple simultaneous clients, so one
VR.EXE process can support VR Mode on multiple machines.

- Added support for simple lists as arguments to voice commands, for
example "move down 5" -> (next-line 5).  Thanks to Steve Freund.

- Added support for repeating commands, for example "move up", "repeat
yank", etc., based on code by Steve Freund.

- Added numerous voice commands to vr-default-voice-command-list.

- vr-win-title and vr-win-class can now contain any substring of the
title and/or class name of the Windows window on which VR.EXE will
activate for a given client.

- "Hookified" all VR Mode protocol commands from VR.EXE, to make VR
Mode extensions possible.

- Made voice activation of the minibuffer optional.

- Allow exclusion entries on vr-activation-list so you can voice
activate, for example, "all buffers except those matching REGEXP."

- Automatically shut down VR Mode when Emacs exits, without prompting
the user for confirmation.

- Support multiple Emacs frames, with DNS 4.0 or newer.

RELEASE NOTES:  Release 004

- Allow VR Mode in Emacs and VR.EXE to run on separate computers, so
VR Mode can be used on Unix.

- Allow voice commands to be bound to keystroke sequences, in addition
to M-x commands.

- Redesign the inter-process communication architecture to use TCP/IP
instead of pipes.

RELEASE NOTES:  Release 003

This version fixes a bug in vr.el in V002 that caused Emacs to report
an error message like "wrong argument type: overlayp, nil" every time
the minibuffer was activated.

RELEASE NOTES:  Release 002

This version is a major upgrade to VR Mode, but this should still be
considered alpha-mode software.

VR Mode now allows dictation into any Emacs buffer and supports
multiple buffer simultaneously without losing the text/voice mapping
(see vr-activation-list).  It also allows voice execution of Emacs
commands (see vr-voice-command-list).

Auto fill mode is now supported.

VR Mode will still not work properly if you use multiple Emacs
frames.  In this release, VR Mode does actually track the changes to
the active Emacs frames, but it appears that the Dragon
NaturallySpeaking dictation object does not support changing Windows
handles after it is created.  Perhaps this will be fixed in a future
release of NaturallySpeaking.

Better user documentation is needed.

RELEASE NOTES:  Release 001

This is the very first release of this software, so don't have high
expectations!

VR.EXE depends in the actual Windows handle (HWND) of the Emacs frame
that is active when the program is started.  If you display a VR
Mode target buffer in an Emacs frame other than the original frame or,
worse, close the original frame entirely, VR Mode will not work until
it is restarted.

Auto fill mode is ignored when voice-recognized text is inserted into
the buffer.  As a result, all paragraphs end up as one long line.  If
auto fill mode is enabled, however, you can always say "Press Alt
Quebec" to invoke the Emacs command fill-paragraph.

The next release should contain voice-command bindings for common
Emacs commands (find-file, etc.), hooks for post-dictation processing
(such as by VoiceGrip), design documentation, and who knows what else.
